Response tokens like ‘mm’ and ‘yeah’ are among the most frequent and yet easily overlooked aspects of conversation. Often described as ‘backchannels’, they occupy a central role in
scaffolding interaction, streamlining turn-taking and calibrating
understanding [1, 2]. The sheer frequency and functional importance of these items means we can think of them as interactional tools: linguistic devices that accomplish social actions.
Progress towards interactive language technologies hinges on
understanding and modelling such interactional tools [3, 4].
While some of them have long been studied in a small number of well-resourced languages [5, 6], their structure and variation across diverse languages is mostly uncharted territory. Here
we combine insights from comparative linguistics, conversation
analysis and computational approaches to shed new light on a
key aspect of human interactional infrastructure.
Tackling structure and variation in response tokens across

Figure 1: Instances of response tokens in their natural environment in 3 unrelated languages: Arabic, Catalan and Japanese.
We use the structural fact that such tokens tend to occur in series as a way to identify them across languages.

languages requires addressing three interlinked challenges. The
first is a dearth of data: corpora of casual speech, crucial to ensure solid foundations for diversity-aware language technology,
are still quite rare. We address this by using conversational corpora from diverse sources, including language documentation
archives that are increasingly available but rarely used. The second is how to achieve comparability in uncharted territory. We
address this by using the sequential structure of conversation to
ensure we compare like with like across unrelated languages.
The third is an overreliance on orthographic representations,
which risks underestimating degrees of variation and flexibility in the use of response tokens. We address this by staying as
closely as possible to the speech signal in its sequential context,
rather than taking written forms for granted.