Turn-taking is the fundamental ability of humans to organize
spoken interaction, i.e., to coordinate who the current speaker
is, in order to avoid the need for interlocutors to listen and speak
at the same time [1]. A dialog can be viewed as a sequence of
turns, constructed through the joint activity of turn-taking between the two speakers. A turn refers to segments of activity
where a single speaker controls the direction of the dialog. In
conversational systems, turn-taking has traditionally been modeled using threshold policies which recognize silences longer
than a chosen duration as transition-relevant places. Although
these types of models are commonly used, it is well known that
they are insufficient for modeling human-like turn-taking [2],
since silences inside of a speaker turn are often longer than silences between turns. Thus, such policies will either result in
interruptions or sluggish responses.
However, since pauses, overlaps and interruptions are very
common phenomena, and since turn-taking is often optional, it
is hard come up with objective criteria for what a turn really is,
and how to automatically identify turns in dialog data [2]. One
approach to make data-driven modeling of turn-taking feasible, is to instead model the dynamics of the voice-activity (VA)
of the dialog participants (i.e., the binary notion of whether a
person is speaking or not). From the VA, we can then identify certain events related to turn-taking. When VA from one
speaker transitions to VA from the other speaker, we can identify a SHIFT, and when there is a silence within the VA of a
single speaker (without VA from the other speaker), there is a
HOLD. During a turn controlled by one speaker there may also
be shorter, isolated VA from the other speaker, which roughly
corresponds to the phenomenon called backchannels [3], i.e.,
shorter feedback vocalizations such as “mhm”. These turntaking events are very important to identify for a conversational
system. For example, it should be able to tell whether a mutual
silence should be identified as a SHIFT or a HOLD. It is also
important to identify when it is appropriate to backchannel, and
whether the start of a VA is likely to constitute a backchannel
or a longer contribution (i.e., a proper turn shift).

Figure 1: The VAP model processes the input features at time
t. The input to the model is the combined speech waveforms of
the two speakers (xt ), the VA-frames of the window (vtf ), and
the longer VA-history (vth ). The waveform and VA-features are
processed separately, projected to a common feature space and
added together to produce the predictor input, ht . The predictor consists of a causal transformer feeding into the VAP-head
to produce the output projection. The green box illustrates the
various outputs of the different models that we compare.

There are two main approaches to data-driven modeling of
turn-taking, characterized by the cost of data collection, training objective and model utility. We use model utility to denote the ease of mapping the model outputs to specific actions,
or in other words, how straightforward the model outputs are
interpreted as specific actions by the researcher. The training
objectives can coarsely be organized in to two groups: supervised and self-supervised learning. Supervised learning refers
to classification models which map some input feature space to
specific labels. As these labels are typically human-annotated,
the cost of data collection is high. On the other hand, since the
training objective is very specific, the model utility is high, as
the labels can be interpreted explicitly. This has been the most
commonly used approach for training turn-taking systems in the
past [4, 5, 6].
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) can be viewed as the task
of reconstructing, or predicting, occluded parts of the data. The
idea is to train on these general tasks, minimizing the networks
capacity to exploit “shortcuts”, in order to find patterns useful

for modeling the underlying data distribution. Once trained,
a SSL model can be fine-tuned on a particular dataset, retrained on a downstream task, its representations used as input
to other systems, or used directly through “zero-shot” classification. Zero-shot classification is done by mapping the model’s
outputs directly to the relevant classes in a specific task, without the need of additional training. Many areas of research have
shown promising performance gains by utilizing SSL such as
Vision [7, 8], Audio [9, 10, 11] and NLP [12, 13].
Compared to supervised learning, data collection for SSL
is much cheaper (since no annotation is needed), whereas the
general self-supervised training objective produces lower model
utility outputs. For example, a trained self-supervised model
may provide good representations to be used in a downstream
task, but the outputs themselves may not be directly interpreted
or practically useful (in and of themselves).
Skantze [14] introduced an incremental and general SSL
task suitable for modeling turn-taking, where a system is trained
to predict probabilities associated with future VA, for each
speaker, over a dialog. The idea is that if a model can successfully predict the future VA of a dialog, that information can be
used to control the turn-taking actions of a conversational system. In addition to the training objective, they introduced two
zero-shot tasks (i.e., ways of utilizing the low model utility outputs), in order to infer turn-taking events directly. In their work
they showed that this general task of modeling future VA was
successful in producing turn-taking models which could distinguish between SHIFT and HOLD, along with more complex
tasks described below. Others reproduced these finding while
improving performance by using more advanced input features
and model architectures [15, 16] as well as its generalization
across languages [17].
In this paper, we extend prior work, highlight a theoretical
weakness of their design, and propose an alternative. We show
empirically that our design improves performance on two new
zero-shot tasks, while having equal or greater performance on
existing tasks. We provide publicly available code1 which standardizes the evaluation “zero-shot” metrics, events (moments of
interest), and model output layers, in order to make these tasks
more accessible to the research community at large.